Thank you very much, everybody, for your attendance today. We are now starting the formal part of the
day with regards to our role as the Māori Affairs Select Committee of Parliament itself. But first
of all, thank you very much for the mean pocket time. It's a very warm welcome to such a beautiful
place that you have here itself. And one of the treasures that we have as a committee is to be
able to get around the country and come to places to use when you are and to enjoy your hospitality,
but also to see sometimes places that we've never been before. And that's myself on this occasion,
this is the first time I've had the opportunity to be here and I can tell you. I was excited to come
and I'm pleased that I have come. So thank you for the very warm welcome to your pinua here itself.
So today the process here is that we as a select committee, we are here to hear from those who
submitted to the process of this Treaty settlement that we have in front of us here.
It is usual for us to hear those that are in support of the Treaty settlement, but it's not
unusual for us to hear from people that actually are not in support of the Treaty settlement for
whatever reason they may have. So today is about us gaining a better understanding of what
the submissions are that are coming towards us to take into account when we deliberate on behalf
of the settlement. Clearly there's been a long, you might argue, arduous timeframe of actually getting
it to this point here, but nevertheless this particular stage is an important one for the Crown
because what we are talking about here is creating law and law binds everybody
towards it, including the Crown. And I take words of some of the submissions here. The settlement
itself is the beginning of a rebuild of an area of different places that we intend itself.
So we are very keen to hear from the submitters. Today we are looking at hearing from five parties
today. It's our convention that we always start with the negotiating group to open up these
the proceedings, but we also, as for Fairness, is to allow them to close up at some time at the end
as well. That's what we've always done as a committee and we feel that that is a fair way.
We will also be having a hearing in Wellington also. So there are some people that couldn't make
their way to here today and for Fairness we want to make sure they have the opportunity also.
So we will be conducting a hearing in Wellington in a short time as well.
So the proceedings here, our convention, like everything is largely convention with the
regards to sleep committees, is that we generally give groups 10 minutes to present
and individual five minutes to present and we'd like to allow a bit of time for some
questions as well within those time frames. We've only got a short number today so as the
chair, I'll be a little bit flexible but we do have still have time to get by
and please excuse me if I have to interrupt and move on to questions or to close the submission
off at that time so I don't want to mind. Now we have a number of people that are present with
us today that are from Wellington and other places as well and of course we heard from
Martia who spoke earlier on and Martia is here to help us with translation.
Not all of us are fluent in terms of some of us are but not all of us are so it's very important
that we understand particularly if you wish to use Tariel in your presentation and that's
absolutely accepted. So we have a number of other staff from Te Tari Pakatoa, the Ministry of
Trans-Sentiments but also from our Parliamentary Services staff who help us out as a committee
to make sure. There's a number of formalities here it is a recorded meeting so we record the meeting
it's not zoomed is it? It's actually just a recording today obviously usually we would actually
have it publicly available. This is a public meeting so people are able to are allowed to
come in here unless I feel that an individual or a grouping are causing disruption to our
process and not adding constructively to it then I have a role as chair to manage that
if they've never had to do that no if I don't have to do that today and it's also
convenient you'll see that we've got a couple of helpers here with Henare and also Jeff
for Security that's normal for us. Parliamentary Services who have a responsibility of looking
after the welfare of us all but including the members of Parliament we just need to make
sure that we've got ourselves being kept safe as well. Our staff came here yesterday and they
apparently they moved these tables around a number of different ways to try and get the best
positioning to be able to conduct this so thank you to the staff for the work you've done and
I'm sure it will work fine. So with that let me make sure there's nothing else I need to say
I think I've covered most of it itself thank you once again we look very much forward to
hearing what you have and first up as I said before we've got a Te Pote Taupoki who has been
doing the negotiations and all that and we'll open with your submission to begin with Te Arawa.
Akiwata.
So I'm submitting on behalf of the Te Pote Taupoki which is a
trust established to receive the Dean of Settlement on behalf of Nati Uppani Maiwai.
Nati Uppani Maiwai want to settle and trust
strong support of the Nati Uppani Maiwai that he want to claim settlement bill
and urge the Justice Committee to recommend that it's passed with an amendment.
This settlement has been a long time coming
going on 40 years now people have waited generations for the Crown to acknowledge
what the Crown did to our people. The Dean of Settlement represents a hard one
negotiated agreement made in good faith and the bill gives it legal effect.
We ask Parliament to honour that agreement.
Trust was established specifically to receive the settlement and all its benefits
in trust current and future generations of Nati Uppani Maiwai Karamon.
We are ready our governance is in place
and our pathway towards it is prepared and our people are waiting.
The historical account in the Dean records plainly and permanently
the serious Crown wrongs committed against Nati Uppani Maiwai Karamon.
These include the home Crown attacks on the Kōpani and Onepoto in the 1860s
and the scorched earth tactics that destroyed our Kaimai Free Supply.
Coercive and unlawful lands and dealings that strip Nati Uppani Maiwai Karamon
lands under pressure and duress. Broken promises of self-government under the
Udo Wera Reserve arrangements and decades of dispossession that left our people virtually
landless and severed from our ancestral rule. Our ancestral rule.
The Crown's formal acknowledgments and apology in the Dean recognises
these breaches of the tenacity of Waitangi and the profound harms they caused.
Lots of life, lots of land, cultural dislocation and long-term socioeconomic damage across generations.
There is not simply illegal formality. The public record and apology are vital for that for our people.
They validate the limited experience of our kōmatsu and confirm the truth of what happened.
They acknowledge the intergenerational harm trauma that continues to affect our whānau today.
They provide a foundation for restoring honour and building a just ongoing relationship between
the Crown and Nati Uppani Maiwai Karamon. Most importantly this history told and
recorded by us becomes a permanent record and Mokopunna will always know who they are,
where they come from and why this redress matters.
Cultural redress in this city is significant and is important that we expect unique.
Transfer of lands into Te Udo Wera reflects a clear and principled shift away from the Crown's
model of private ownership toward a framework that recognises Te Udo Wera as a legal entity in its own right
and affirms Nati Uppani Maiwai Karamon's role as Kaitiaki which has always been a truth.
Our mana and Kaitiaki tam over this law here were never extinguished.
They were suppressed by Crown actions. The Te Udo Wera Act model corrects that.
Whakapapa becomes the legal foundation for access, use and responsibility.
Entirely consistent with our Te Uppuna,
understood and exercised authority over this law here since time immemorial.
Settlement also transfers specific sites including Tūriokahu and Kaitawa
and its Crown properties into Te Udo Wera. These sites provide places for housing and
reconnection to our whānau, governance arrangements, embed our decision-making
and tikanga alongside statutory protections enabling conservation, visitor use and community
needs to be managed together in a way that reflects our values.
In short, the settlement gives legal expression to what has always been
true that Nati Uppani Maiwai Karamon has a hapu of two ways of holding responsibilities of Kaitiaki
Tam within Te Udo Wera. It creates a durable framework for that authority to be exercised,
recognised and honoured into the future. Nati Uppani Maiwai Karamon has a hapu of two ways.
That Whakapapa relationship was not administrative, it is who we are.
It defines our identity, our obligations to this law and the tikanga under which we
exercise our Kaitiaki Tam within Te Udo Wera. Our relationship with two ways is one of
whanau and is from that foundation that we act as Thamata Whanaua of Waikaremona.
Two ways of supporting the settlement, that support is not incidental, it reflects a shared
Whakapapa understanding of the responsibilities and authority that belongs to the people of this
law. It is that living relationship, not administrative structures that will continue to guide
how we care for Waikaremona and Te Udo Wera. As required by the treaty settlement process,
we engage with all neighbouring iwi throughout the negotiation of this settlement. Those conversations
were conducted in good faith and are a matter of record. Whether we have raised concerns about
the settlement, we acknowledge those views while respectfully disagreeing. Our authority over
this law is grounded in Whakapapa and in the continuity of our presence and responsibilities as
Ahikaa. There is not a position we arrive at through negotiation, there is not one we will depart.
Other iwi have had the opportunity through the treaty settlement process to achieve redress to
their claims. We do not accept that our settlement is the appropriate vehicle from re-litigating
their outcomes.
Financial and commercial redress, the trust acknowledges honestly that no financial
settlement can fully compensate for the scale of what was taken from Nazi Europe and
the losses of land and of economic capacity across generations cannot be reduced to a dollar
figure. What the financial and commercial redress does provide is a foundation.
It gives us the tools to begin rebuilding the economic strength and prosperity our
people have had before being disenfranchised from our land and customary rights. The trust
is prepared to deploy these assets purposefully, to grow them into jobs, services and intergenerational
wealth for our people. Partners have been identified, plans are in place and we will
report transparently on outcomes to our youth. The settlement does not end our journey
and begins the rebuilding. We wish to speak plainly to the committee about what continued
delay means for our people. We have carried this hurt for too long. The weight of unresolved
historical grievance has worn down our values, our beliefs, our relationships with one another.
Reaching in action brings more disconnection from our role, more lost opportunities to
invest in our far known Langata, our deeper harm to the way well of our community.
Our co-martial have waited their whole lives and many have passed the lead now.
Whole lives from this acknowledgement, our Langata deserves to inherit our settlement,
empowered identity and not a legacy of unresolved grievance. The bill is the first essential
step toward the restoration. Passing it now means we can begin the real work.
Healing relationships, restoring kaitiakitanga over Waikato Mauna, strengthening our far known
well-being and building a stable future. Further delay will deepen the harm. There is no benefit
for the crown or to our people in prolonging the process. The Ngati Rupani Maewaikato Mauna
settlement first respectfully requests that the Justice Committee recommend that the Ngati Rupani
Maewaikato Mauna claim settlement bill be passed without a means. Acknowledging its report, the
significance of historical record and crown apology to the people of Ngati Rupani Maewaikato.
Prioritizing the bill's passage said that the work of restoration and rebuilding can begin
without questions. I will take a couple of short questions now, but understanding we'll have another
opportunity at the end of our hearing to ask further questions, but I think we already have
questions that we have from members at this time.
Are you asking a question? Yes. Unfortunately, the process is here for us to ask questions,
we don't turn it across examination. I mean to sort of pick apart one of the other submissions?
She's part of the other submission. Yeah, so you get an opportunity to talk to what you wish to then,
okay? So, thank you very much, Kara, for that verbal submission itself and we'll be seeing you again
later on. So, thank you. Kia ora. Kia ora. So, we'll move now to Ngati Rupani Maewaikato Mauna
Koa and Dr. Rapa Tawhiti.
Rapa Tawhiti, 10 minutes out today. So, you use it how you see, but we have the opportunity
to read the written submission, but you use it as you wish to.
My name is Dr. Rapa Tawhiti and I speak on behalf of Ngati Rupani Kiwita Kitae Cooperative Society.
I am one of seven directors. We were set up under the Companies Act to Unify All Ngati Rupani from
Waikarewana to Waiiwau to Gisborne because our Te Puna Rupani is actually from Gisborne.
The current submitters Te Whare Taupuki represent Ngati Rupani Maewaikarewana,
affectionately referred to by Alston Best in his book Two Way As Children of the Mist.
First, we represent Ngati Rupani Kiwika Rupana who are effectively the children who got mistyped.
So, the difference between Mai Waikarewana and Ki Waikarewana is fundamental to this proposed bill.
First, we vehemently oppose the proposed bill passed on the fact that its foundations,
its framework, are seriously flawed. In particular, I draw your attention to Te Whare Taupuki's
submission which states that Ngati Rupani is a hapu of Two Way. We have proven beyond all
reasonable doubt in the Waitangi Tribunal hearing of 2004 that Ngati Rupani are not a hapu of Two Way.
Rupani, this large year was named after Rupani as a male ancestor from Gisborne who came here,
his six generations from the Whaka Horohta which landed in Gisborne.
Two Way comes from another waka called Matatua. Two Way comes from Whakatane.
So, there is no Whakapapa connection between Rua Pani and Two Way.
So, from the outset, the submission by Te Whare Taupuki is flawed in terms of its own Whakapapa.
To clarify, there are two entities at the core of this debate.
This proposal only caters for those for Rua Pani who Whakapapa to Two Way
and does not cater for those for Rua Pani who Whakapapa to Kahungunu to all the land
in between here in Waialu to Gisborne and who have land rights and the six plots that
have been transferred to Te Urewera Board, which is a Two Way Board.
That's what's proposed under this bill.
Therefore, this bill must be urgently halted. This bill is inconsistent with the Crown's Treaty
obligations of active protection and good faith. The Whakapapa in history of the
submittance to Te Whare Taupuki who have just discovered are the PSGE. We had no idea.
They're going to receive this $24 million plus the six plots of land.
It's incorrect and it is Two Way centric.
By passing this bill, you are validating false Whakapapa and a fabricated history
of Ngati Rua Pani in my Waikarewana, which is essentially a Two Way biased history.
Even the Māori translation of this report is Two Way biased. It's written in the
Two Way dialect. We oppose the bill vehemently as we argue that false Whakapapa and false
historical accounts cannot be validated by the Crown or its agencies or by its ministers.
In their Whakapapa and historical accounts, which are documented in this
settlement, the history of Rua Pani, Ngati Rua Pani is confused and influenced by an ideology
called Te Mana Motuhake o Two Way, which states believes that Ngati Rua Pani is a haku of Two
Way, four to long side Two Way, to define this beautiful Te Uruweta Genohi Portae o Two Way,
the Uruweta District Native Reserve in 1896. However, if you read their historical account,
the history that they have written fails to acknowledge that Ngati Rua Pani
withdrew from Te Rua Portae o Two Way in 1899. We withdrew.
And we formed our own Mana Motuhake as Rua Pani in 1899 and again in 1917 with the
Uruweta Consolidation Scheme. When we formed the reserves, the 12 reserves up at Lake Waikaremoana
are only for Ngati Rua Pani, Kewaikaremoana, Tuturu, Ngati Rua Pani, 317 Ngati Rua Pani
owners. We have a list of owners.
Well, I have argued before the Māori land court last year when the submitters, the son,
the grave diger, or Pohene this morning, said that the meeting house up to the land,
the Maraea people, owns the Two Way. Well, I objected to that based on the fact that
Te Mana Motuhake or Two Way is nothing more than ideological Mambo-Jamba.
Therefore, the Whakapapa and historical account presented by Te Whare Taupuki must not be
validated by the select committee. I ask the select committee to pause.
By all, we impose the transfer of the six blocks to Te Uruweta Board
and argue that this bill contradicts te kanga Māori.
And I refer to case law. Case law, the Supreme Court, the case of Pakinikura and Te Kauri Hira Kau Matua
or Two Way versus Te Uitou Matua in 2023, where the Supreme Court ruled that te kanga cannot
be its own judge. This is a Supreme Court decision. Therefore, this cannot, breach of te kanga cannot be
validated by this select committee. This bill is also a breach of Tenoranatiratone
guaranteed in Article 2 of the Treaty. And Mana Motuhake, which Mr. Trainer Teitonau, my uncle,
argued before the constitutional kōpapa inquiry in Palmerston North last year, the draft report.
You can read our evidence at pages 31 and 32 of the draft report of the constitutional kōpapa
inquiry where we rejected the constitutional legitimacy of unilateral crown sovereignty,
which allows laws such as this proposed bill to be passed without consultation.
This proposed bill creates enduring legal prejudice.
We also oppose the bill because the Crown has relied on one group's mandate,
Ngāti Rua Pani mai Wa Karemoana, the children of the mist. The Crown has failed to properly resolve
overlapping claims with our whānau, with our hapū and the six blocks that have been transferred
to Te Uruwera Bo. This is inconsistent with tribunal guidance that overlapping interests
must be properly addressed, not overwritten or ignored as some sort of inter-tribal dispute.
In their submission to Whare Taupoki, claims that the history is plain and permanent.
However, we argue that the history is not as plain and permanent as simple as they might
lead you to believe. The historical account they have provided is very much an unsettled history.
The historical account is Tuhoe centric. Tuhoe centric. Tuhoe bias treats Ngāti Rua Pani
as a hapū. We are not a hapū or tuhoe. We are an iwi in our own right.
The historical account has not been agreed upon by all affected parties. You've heard,
I've read the submissions from our cousins from Ngāti Kahungunu, Tātau Tātau.
Kāroha, kāroha. We have one here. He's going to give evidence today.
This is a dangerous precedent. At risk of becoming legislated history,
this creates a dangerous precedent because disputed historical narratives
become permanently embedded in law. I believe in the rule of law. I gained a master of
laws from Victoria University. I don't believe in the law of the jungle. I believe in the rule
of law. We are possible because Te Uru Wera Board and land authority issues. There are issues with the
Board. The bill embeds redress within Te Uru Wera framework, effectively reinforcing Tuhoe
governance structures, limits recognition of other iwi authorities and PSTEs such as Tātau Tātau.
The locks are fabricated to protection of mana whenua and that is based on
lies and the manipulation of whakapapa. Dr. Winnie, could you just point out any
new outcomes or cover a little bit of what you said about it?
We've been denied equal recognition. We're structurally excluded. The prejudice is severe and
irreversible and the bill will cause permanent loss of mana whenua, loss of treaty claim rights,
distortion of whakapapa and entrenchment of incorrect historical narratives. If I may just
talk briefly about delay. Very briefly. Te Whare Tau Toki argues that delay will cause us harm. We
oppose this because we believe that a rust settlement will create a flawed settlement
and a flawed settlement will cause far greater harm than any delay. Recommendations and I close
up here. We respectfully requested this bill will not and cannot proceed in its current form.
We requested an independent review of whakapapa assertions historical account mandate and agreement
in principle. We request genuine engagement with Ngāti Rua Pani ki Waikarewana claimants
and community as well as Tato Tato and other affected PSTEs. We respectfully urge the
select committee to delay and pause the progress of the bill until these concerns have been
independently examined and resolved. A treaty settlement founded upon unresolved grievances
cannot deliver true and enduring justice. We are not opposed to treaty settlements,
but we urge the select committee to pause on passing this bill in order to make the
foundations of this treaty settlement more solid, more robust, more transparent
and fairer for everyone to consider.
You would know from the legal process around these settlements that
the effect of the Māori Affairs Select Committee's responsibility is to formalize
a data settlement that's been already signed and traditionally it's peculiar or unusual to delay
so you will make the case for exceptional circumstances. Obviously there's often disagreement
with any way about whether a settlement should be made, whether it's sufficient
and we understand we're acutely aware at least that I feel acutely able to visit
the character of settlements often. It's one of the most I've wanted to visit the settlement
processes. I wonder if understanding your profoundly expressed concerns,
do you think there's a version of meaningful amendments that could be made that would resolve
them or is it really the fundamental character of it which places Māori Pāne as a
part of Tūhoi when you believe that Rūpani should be as an independent Tūhoi?
The settlement should be separate from any association with the Tūwhera.
So I feel like I've understood that was really a clarification if I understand. I think you
may have a quick answer. Thank you.
You mentioned the requirement for clarification of Whakapapa and I think we can all agree that
it's not the role of the Crown or this Select Committee. How do you envisage that happening
with that process and who might that group be? I think there needs to be meaningful engagement
between Ngāti Rua Pāne, Māia Waikaremoana or Te Whare Taupoki and Ngāti Rua Pāne, Ki Waikaremoana
and Tātou Tātou to address those overlapping issues of Whakapapa. They haven't been mentally
discussed and Iroha will talk more about that, that kōrero hasn't occurred.
So you need a period of time, you're requesting a period of time for an independent process
driven by respective hapū iwi. What might that time frame be? Six months.
Any last questions of? Kia ora, doctor. Thank you very much for your bashing submission.
We appreciate it and I think you've given us a lot of thought to be considered in our deliberations.
Okay, can we now move to Tāhurio Te Rangi?
We actually have you down for five minutes as an individual, but like I said before,
I'll be a little bit fixable, but we've had the opportunity to read your written submission,
so you point out the key points you want us to understand. Kia ora mai.
Kia ora, I don't think it's going to last long. I'm going to pass over.
I'll position to the bill. I'm sorry, I've written everything in the
language.
This has nothing to do with the spirit of the Uruera,
nor with the thoughts of the leader,
the leader of the Pakeha.
I am a descendant of this country.
I am very concerned about the future of the country.
The decisions for the Uruera
should be made to the people who are in charge of it.
It is not right to take over the power of the Crown.
This is a big issue.
There are no representatives for the Wairoa region
on the board of the Uruera.
There is no language.
There are no connections,
there are no words,
there is no us.
It is not right to change the constitution.
The constitution,
and if it is not to correct this issue.
The Treaty of Waitangi.
This is also related to the Treaty of Waitangi.
The leader, the leader of the people,
the leader of the land.
I say that this bill is not being seen.
In our community,
there are still the former leaders.
When the power was raised,
we did not hear it.
We are still seeing these kinds of things in this bill.
I wanted to.
So the committee does not agree with this bill.
But the Wairoa region is a representative.
The power is not to go to the land.
The Treaty of Waitangi is a good thing.
I will end this.
The Uruera is not the river.
It is a tribe.
We are the people.
The government is our leader to take care of it.
I do not agree with its mana.
I will end my speech.
If the Uruera is not agreed with,
we will also agree with it.
We do not agree with that.
So thank you.
Thank you.
I will just go to Kushla for a question.
Can you hear me?
Yes, I can.
Thank you for talking to us this morning.
If there is another member of the Wairoa on this board,
if there is another member of the Wairoa on the table,
can you support this bill?
Yes, they are very close to us.
We are here in Waitangi.
We are on the Wairoa.
We do not want to stop them.
We want to go to others.
So if there is another member of the Wairoa on the board,
can you support the bill?
Yes, if that is the case, we will be able to do it.
Thank you.
Thank you for the questions from the members.
You have given us a very good written submission
as well as your verbal submission.
Thank you.
I think it is reiterating what your whanaua
has submitted as well.
Kia ora, my, for your submission today.
Kia ora.
I am the Marriver.
Craig Atkinson. Welcome Craig. I had a chat with Craig earlier on. He has traveled over
two hours to be with us today. So, Kia ora my Craig for making the effort to come here and
you've contributed to many treaty sentiments and I'm appreciative of that but you understand
the process here. We've got five minutes allocated for your time. So, I don't want to...
First of all, I'd just like to acknowledge from the mountains, the hills, the lungs,
the rivers, the streams that make the magnificent place that we sit here today. I'd like to acknowledge
all the people that have gone before, the haggie persecution and the tyranny from the crown,
all the people that have been left to fight for years and years and years in the process,
there's not fit process, a process that divides Maori and that. I'd like to acknowledge all the
people that go after all the young people as we see running around and this is what these
treaty claims, I believe, is about, was left for Maori and that to end poverty, to end homelessness
and that there's so much we could achieve from these treaty claims and so much we fail.
And of the basis of it, the crown divides the local iwi's, hapus, they have them arguing
amongst themselves that they can't come to an agreement because it's not full process. That's
part of your game, you sit there and sort of smile and say, oh yeah, but it's it's yourselves that do it.
You rub a stamp in, you're all under contract, you're all paid very well by the crown and that,
so there is no neutrality here. There is numerous conflicts of interest by the committee
and the process and the figure that you come up with, 0.007%,
they get anything that's under a 0.007% or is a negative in my view. The land is never commercially
feasible, the only land they ever give back is actually what will cost the crown money,
so it's just balancing its book by returning, which is a token gesture. The apology is just not,
I acknowledge him and apologies not worth nothing, he's got no value whatsoever.
So yeah, the entire process is flawed for Maori, at the end of it there is no natural justice
and it's all set to divide Maori and things. We've just seen farmers have a payout that
have a 400,000 per household, handed out, how much can we say each iwi here, each individual person,
how much is this treaty claim going to put in their family, I'd say zero, none of them will ever see any
of it. So for that point it doesn't empower Maori and it does nothing more than just put that this is
just another breach of what the treaty was actually set out in the beginning. The other alternate to
the headline negotiation says return off land, pay the rent then you are on it, pay the final
test and that, take the prison sentence for the land that's stolen, because that's what would happen
if Maori took anything. If there was one acre of land taken by Maori that would be returned
and that back, there would be a financial burden and there'd be a prison sentence,
there's none of that either, it's one rule for one and a different rule for others
and it's been like that from dear God. So that's my submission, I fully support the doctors,
submission. Thank you.
Sure, thank you very much.
Any questions for Craig?
You stay.
Good question Craig. I think a lot of us feel the truth in what you said about the
hypocrisy of the Crown and how the Crown still holds the rulebook and determines the conditions
on the settlement. But I want to ask you one thing is when we stand in the house and acknowledge
the apology and recognise the wrongs that are now exited in black and white law
and in unanimity the members of the Parliament will stand and accept the historical account,
accept the atrocities committed by the Crown and recognise the truth of that history.
I can assure you that we do it genuinely and that it's not in any way to diminish
this massive flaws in the Crown's settlement process. But that apology I believe is given
good faith and that acknowledgement from us as members of Parliament is genuine.
You're all under contract to the Crown, you're all put by the Crown. Your first point of the
contract is to protect the Crown's assets. That's where it comes from though Mike, at the end of
it, 28, 24 million is an insult.
Any last questions of Craig?
Craig, thank you very much.
Okay, now we have the written submission of
Ida, Ida, thank you, Ida, Ida, and I believe you are, are you speaking on behalf of me?
Or are you either? I'm sorry, I've just got a message that it might be James that was going to be
my presentation. Welcome, welcome today. And once again we've had that opportunity to
read your written submission and we've got approximately five minutes out of the
time. So, and here's it as you see that. Thank you.
Just acknowledgement for all of you coming in today in person. This is a submission on behalf of
Alphana really, submitted by my father James. He can't be seen as apologies, can't make it
through today. Apologies from my two Akana, James, who can't make it through today. So,
I also live in Wairau. So, and for full transparency to acknowledge some of the
koro, particularly from Rahata. I also sit as a director at Tato-Tato-Tawairo Trust
and I have been at the koro that was had with Tato-Tato and Paritopoki,
Ngati Rupani, my Waikaremona Trust. We're in the submission here. It's at the heart of
the submission is the issue of overlapping interests. If interest is the right word,
we've talked about negotiations, responsibilities. And so, this is coming from our
Hini Manuhiti Whakapapa, but in Alphano through my grandmother Frances. We whakapapa to
Rupani, we whakapapa to Ngai Tuwhai, and we whakapapa to Hini Manuhiti. Hini Manuhiti being
Ngati Kahungunu, to Wairau.
So, Hini Manuhiti, the granddaughter of Kahungunu,
Hini Manuhirikia Pukaru, the son of Rupani. So, that's really, this is winding back
several hundred years now, you know. And so, we're at the Whakapapa and for Alphano, yeah,
two feet and three cams, you know. So, there was a map attached, I don't know if it came through
so, the map was really speaking to that overlapping interest for a little again with the,
and these are historical traditional boundaries that again go back hundreds of years. More recently
and more recent history, these boundaries were talked about in countless hearings and court cases and
legislation processes dating back 1875, I think one of the earliest in the wider hearing,
where the these Kahungunu, these Hini Manuhiti boundaries were put on the table. They've been
disputed, they've been debated, they've been accepted and negated over all those years since 1875,
Taino Kiteniwa, you know, to this day. But it just is to really just show how these,
how significant these, the Spinoa is, Putanoi Waipari Moana, specifically those six dock reserves,
which sit on the wider side of the lake, you know, on the southern side, and there's a,
so they sit on the wider side of the lake, so, and those are where you see those overlapping,
those overlapping boundaries with Tuhoe, with Tamatirangi, Makaro, Hinganga, Pupuni,
Pariroa, so those are, and they, that's, yeah, so that's the issue with this,
with the six dock reserves in particular, and the question being how can the Crown
make a decision ignoring Hini Manuhiti's Whakapapa and responsibilities to those
six dock reserves, which sit across four southern blocks, which if we talk about acknowledgement
and apologies, which I totally acknowledge the apology and the acknowledgments that are sitting
currently within the Rupani settlement, but though that acknowledgement also sits in the
Wairau settlement as well, acknowledgement of the four southern blocks being confiscated
from Hini Manuhiti, and here we are now, 2018, what's that, eight years after our settlement in
Wairau, saying you don't have any interest now in those southern blocks, where those six
dock reserves sit, so that's the question. We talk about Lake Waikaremoana, another example
of where the Crown in 1971 at least, recognised Hini Manuhiti interests in the Waikaremoana
lakebed, which still exists to this day, so how does that, how does the Crown reconcile that
interest here, and then not recognise any interests in those six dock reserves, so that's
that's what the submission talks to, there's some historical
content there around Makuro, he must have been a favourite bit of a mokai of his,
of his koro, of his koro, because there's very many sites around here named after Makuro.
Taita Makuro is our outpost, that's our boundary marker halfway between here and Rotahuna.
Taita Makuro, we've got Dahitiya Makuro, the Uria Makuro, the Anaa Makuro, Te Kurea Makuro,
that one's half a dozen size significance named after Makuro.
Just to talk more specifically towards the bill and the date of settlement,
um financial redress uh is Pitaful at 24 million, um given the history that we're all
coming you know I'm up to speed with now, what's happened here over the last 160 years,
so 24 million dollars, I think the Waikaremoana by Joe Electric's power scheme would probably earn
that in one financial quarter, so in three months you know this is what the high electric scheme here
would make 24 million dollars, so I think it's um woefully inadequate um and needs to be
needs to be reconsidered, I do acknowledge you have no negotiation for it for Rupani, it's a
futile space um financial redress for all of our iwi put in law, um with the land, all the land
grateful, um grateful for the land back, thank you for the land back, um we'll uh we'll accept that
as a installment and uh part payment um as in time we get it all back, so we want all the land back
um but we're we're we're grateful for what what what's been put on the table here
and of course some of those six documents were not on the table for during the time of
wire or settlement, so I asked well why didn't you guys sort it then, well that wasn't offered to us
and the Tudueta board questions there, questions around uh the the addition of the any final
really to the Tudueta board, issues around uh administration, uh accountancy, accountability
sorry for the Tudueta board, issues around um the well crown funding of the Tudueta board
and and the governance of the Tudueta board, given that there's been uh not confident that the
Tudueta board is managing what the Fenerweight already has on behalf of Tudueta, Tangata,
you know I'm not sure if the Tudueta board's actually delivering what the Fenerweight already
has and whether we should be thinking about adding more to it, we need to look at um is the crown
committed to the Tudueta Act and the obligations under the Tudueta Act, are they really delivering
on on what the Tudueta, Tudueta is the concept of everything, are they committed to it, I don't
I'm not seeing that yet, I'm questioning the position of the three Crown Director Appointments
on that on that board um uh whether or not there needs to be an opportunity to look at
those positions and is there a position uh at that table, I mean if we look at who's there for our
alfano, we have Tuhoe, we have Rua Pani, I mean is there, do we need a wahine at the table
and should Hini Manuhiri have a seat at that table and bring in her reinforcements
to help deliver the mahi, I mean if you look at Tudueta, legal personhood born in 2014, he's 12 now,
do we need a wahine to come in there Hini Manuhiri to Tautupu and help raise this thumb up
and bring in her reinforcements to help deliver the work that the moment is not happening,
I don't feel pest control, biodiversity, those things question, highly question of what
moment, recommendation is to um really reset the financial redress, think of a better figure and
double it to um pause rethink on the Tudueta uh addition to the Tudueta board and really look at
a perhaps a review and also that setup of the governance is there a position for Hini Manuhiri
and rather than um create that later this is the time to sort it now and it's sound and I
feel that it's needed and um finally with the six dock reserves sorry but it has to be a pause
this is a um there's you'll see there's a lot of interest here there's a lot at stake
this is an opportunity um Maia talked about a Tautupu Numi between between Hini Manuhiri and
Ngai Tuhoi 1828 and it's all across that where those dock reserves sit this is an opportunity
for us to fully embrace that um that Tautupu Numi that peace accord it's not about um the
crown making that the sorting sorting our value out for us but those dock reserves an opportunity
to create some lasting legacy a lasting enduring legacy and to bury the hatchet at the very least
between Ngai Tuhoi and Hini Manuhiri deliver some um start doing the mahi and um leaving
the lasting legacy for our tamariki Mokopuna that we talked about in these settings
often yeah we don't we don't record at all
okay questions are there any questions
good submission and thank you for the metaphor so it gives us uh who are firing to your your
funeral uh greater understanding than exactly what you're talking about itself so we appreciate you
coming on behalf of your father and your presence in today let's go
okay thank you
so there's an opportunity here for everybody uh to uh to give us a closing comments if they
so if yep hi
and just so you know uh uh
um so just so you understand uh have an opportunity now to buy and you also have
at the end of the uh valentine submission process as well uh and it's important for us to hear your
response for what you feel about itself so once again we have about 10 minutes or they're about
seeing from me at this closing of this so uh i don't know how you enjoy stuff please so
kia ora mr chair kia ora committee members so my name is wider to yamai i am employed by the
nati rua pani my wife and i'm one of the trustees and i have
rua pani through my uh piku hore and my grandfather
so i want to respond to some of the questions that have arrived in the um submissions so
historical account is too eccentric this historical account truthfully describes the atrocities
suffered by the rua pani people the historical count is a shared historical narrative because
the histories of two rua pani and kahu nunu are deeply intertwined through whakapapa and shared
events so a degree of overlap in the narrative is unavoidable and historically accurate i also
want to reiterate that we rejected the crown translator and insisted on using our own
translator translators for the historical count namely nusen lambit myru rehe and
patrick migavi who certified the translation these mean a rua pani and they are too high
you cannot separate that to suggest otherwise would be like trying to chop them in half and saying
okay guys i only want the rua pani part of you to translate the historical count the
two hoy park can go and sit in the naughty corner so that would be messy it would take
twice as long to translate and we would still be negotiating the account today so yes calling this
is too hewley centric is not wrong as our artists have said and as nusen has told me
what the artist said that i am the rua pani and i am too high you cannot split the two
okay so this all is fit for purpose throughout the negotiation settlement process we have
maintained an open door policy we have consistently brought our early along on the settlement journey
at the monthly hapu hui by our social media platforms our website and our panui and we
met with uti individually on separate several occasions at bed request we also consulted
and engaged with our neighbouring for no longer overlapping groups at bed tari online and
willington and at our marae we also wrote a letter of intent to our overlapping groups how we will
come and work together on shared interests i also want to remind mr heider that we agreed
that we needed to strengthen our relationships we didn't deny that and we agreed that those
fucker papa questions that rise do not belong in the settlement process they belong outside of this
process this bill is fit for purpose because it does not deny anyone access everyone who has
fucker papa to to uru where it will continue to have access to their land to continue their
customer rights to hunt and connect to their whenua the uru where to act is inclusive and welcomes
everybody to visit to uru where but a psge does not have automatic rights here the whenua the six
revered reserves that everyone has claimed on are here they're not in wellamson so the people
presenting there why are they not here talking to us directly on the whenua because that is te konga
this bill is fit for purpose because the majority 82.82 percent of ballot votes cast on the resolution
voted agreed the voter return was 72.35 percent with 492 votes cast 79.88 percent voted online with
21 20.12 percent voted by post or in person at the information hui we now hold the highest voter
rate in the motu and that was through hard work through the hapu here if we pause the settlement
then the crown will undermine our whānau who attended these information hui which none of those
outside you have listened today or to put it up okay do not attend this bill is fit for purpose
because real punny why could a mourner have waited long enough and to pause the settlement on these
flimsy a or a multi-templated submissions would be wrong and would be a dark stain on the crown
this bill is fit for purpose because it is designed with intention and it is well considered
and it was built on the aspirations of al-udi but more importantly it was built so we can
build a Waikā mourner that is prosperous and vibrant for al-mukupuna this bill is not fit
to discuss our whakapapa that is as i've mentioned before outside the settlement
we agreed on that in our hui with our neighbouring whānau in a group this bill cannot be paused
because we have work to do today we need to learn to put our own personal grievances aside
because our mokupuna cannot be left dealing with this 30 years down the track
and in my final remark i want to remind al-fānau here who have attended today
on 28th February 2026 we decided the deed of settlement right out there and present
were our rūpani iwi no manatūke and they supported our settlement and support our settlement actively
i just to clear up the difference between my Waikā remona and ki Waikā remona
our claim is under three tīpuna three rūpani tīpuna pūkehore two wae and henikū
rūpani had many children twins and grandchildren twins
and so he had a lot of descendants a lot of uli
most of those uli in the outside Waikā remona they are not āhikā
they have no tūrāma wāi wāi here the last speaker
here he has got faka papa he's got faka papa
so he specifically changed the three tīpuna because that's what he had closed and quizzed it
when they first put the claims in for the land they were under pūkehore
two wae and his sister henikūla because henikūla was
uli and two wise uli and to marry the best three generations down
those nāti rūpani outside of Waikā remona they married into
heni manuhiri tamate rangi descendants of pūkehore
nāti mākoro
nāti ināna
the descendants of pāreora pārero
gradually married into tūhōi
but they're still in the tūhōi settlement there's 50% of tepūkehere
nāi talabālu 50% dates with
nāti pāhō weather and 50% under tūhō and they are under our claim to
and as I think maybe there's a quite a few points quite succinct
I'm more ready to kill a tāpā
once a clarity or questions is all in it
the kohirutama to Anaotikitiki.
That kohirutama will be destroyed by the descendants of Aote Rupani.
That kohirutama will be destroyed.
That kohirutama will be destroyed by the descendants of Tuhoe.
The kohirutama will be destroyed by the descendants of Waikaremoana, Tuhoe Rupani,
and the descendants of Kaununu, who are from Ngārangi Mataeo.
They were told that they were going to sleep on the mountains to make a good family.
They were told that they were going to sleep on the mountain.
That kohirutama will be destroyed by the descendants of Aote Rupani, and the descendants of Kaununu, who are from Ngārangi Mataeo.
That kohirutama will be destroyed.
That kohirutama will be destroyed by the descendants of Waikaremoana, Tuhoe Rupani,
and the descendants of Kaununu, who are from Ngārangi Mataeo.
That kohirutama will be destroyed.
The descendants of Waikaremoana, Tuhoe Rupani, and the descendants of Kaununu, who are from Ngārangi Mataeo.
This is not the case with the descendants of Waikaremoana.
The descendants of Waikaremoana, Tuhoe Rupani, and the descendants of Waikaremoana,
the descendants of Waikaremoana, who are from Ngārangi Mataeo.
The descendants of Waikaremoana, Tuhoe Rupani, and the descendants of Kaununu, who are from Ngārangi Mataeo.
Tuhoe Rupani, Tuhoe Rupani, and the descendants of Waikaremoana, who are from Ngārangi Mataeo.
I know that my family is from there.
But the descendants of Waikaremoana, who are from Ngāti Hime Manuhi and Ngāti Kaununu,
are from Ngāti Hime Manuhi.
We can't take any last questions from Indus.
If not, thank you very much for your closing comments there.
If I just make some closing comments for myself.
You know, I often look at these Treaty settlement processes in the part that we play.
We, as members of Parliament, are here for a small amount of time to try and do the best we can
in what I call a process that's perfectly imperfect.
It's by no means, and as we've heard, I empathise with people saying that the redress is a stretch of the surface.
It's a pittance of actually the wrong doings of the past.
And we see this all over the water, all over the place, back where I'm from, the Karanaki.
We've seen it all there.
And I'm very mindful personally that this process here is about providing a new beginning to rebuild
from everything that has been lost, and that presents its challenges in itself.
And the resource that comes from Treaty settlements can be easily argued as just a pittance of what it takes
to begin that journey.
But a bigger concern of mine is we often, if not always, hear from Rano Nui of a settlement
where there's unrest between your people.
And it concerns me that the Karanaki is endeavouring to start again with its responsibilities
and allow iwi to rebuild.
But are we sometimes causing a new problem within iwi?
I'm very mindful of that, and I ask that question about this, and I accept the journey,
the arduous journey that's been had to get your settlement to this point.
We play but a part in this process, and it's always valuable for us to be number one on the
whenua.
And I take your point, Waititi, about Kōrero being here on your whenua,
and we have to go back to Wellington to discuss the query, to ask questions of people to try
and help you to start again.
And that is a challenge, and it's like I said, it's imperfect where we're here.
But it's so important for us to hear from everybody, your whanaua, and the different
points of view, because you don't get that from reading documents.
It's so important to hear and to see and to feel the empathy, feel the emotion of
what this is on both sides, because we have a job here that is so important.
A treaty settlement is an important part in your history.
It will be looked back on in this process here, but it's just a point of time.
It's actually the future and what you're doing intergenerational for everybody else in
the future, that we are mindful of trying to giving you a pathway, giving you
some more open doors to be able to begin that new journey.
And it doesn't come without its challenges and emotions at our end, because I
think we all here reflect on our own home, Iwi and Appu, with what they've
gone through in there.
So it is quite an emotional journey that I say personally for us to actually go
through this here.
But in closing, thank you for the openness of everybody that submitted today.
On both sides of the argument, it's a thank you for being respectful to run
another.
I actually was remiss in saying at the beginning, I always try to say it's
important that your use of the rugby to play the ball, not the man.
This is about the co-papa.
It's not about the personalities and as far as I could see today, that
was spentfully done by all the submitters, so I appreciate that.
And also it's obviously appropriate for me to thank all the people that
have made this so welcoming for us to come and conduct our official
responsibilities here on your friend over here.
Thank you, Craig, for making such a long journey to participate too.
I acknowledge that.
Thank you to the staff.
The important part of making our job easier and also the people that
keep us safe in this environment that you've got here.
Thank you for my first opportunity to be here.
You have a beautiful part of the world.
It was a lovely journey that we had this morning from Waiteraw
and through your wonderful valleys.
It's a beautiful place and I hope to bring my whāia whānau here
back here at some stage in the future as well because it's a
special place with that.
I bring this official part of our proceedings today to a close
and may I ask you perhaps to say maybe a closing comment here for us today.
Kia ora.
Kia ora, maia.